---
title: 'AcousticPlotter: A stand-alone Matlab application for viewing, comparing, and selecting thresholds of ABR and DPOAE data'
tags:
  - Auditory Brainstem Response (ABR)
  - Distortion Product Otoacoustic Emissions (DPOAEs)
  - Matlab
  - Tucker and Davis (TDT)
authors:
  - name: Stephen McInturff
    orcid: 0000-0002-3356-4692
    corresponding: true
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Konstantina M. Stankovic
    orcid: 0000-0003-0233-279X
    affiliation: 1
affiliations:
 - name: Department of Otolaryngology, Stanford University, USA
   index: 1
date: 7 December 2022
bibliography: paper.bib

---


## Summary

The `AcousticPlotter` application provides researchers with a simplified interface for viewing, comparing, grouping, and selecting thresholds of auditory electrophysiological data: auditory brainstem responses (ABRs) and distortion product otoacoustic emissions (DPOAEs). Created using Matlab’s application compiler, `AcousticPlotter` is designed for researchers using TDT’s BioSigRZ software. Audiometric thresholds are semi-automatically determined based upon the algorithms of Suthakar & Liberman ([2019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heares.2019.107782)) for ABRs and Bartho et al. ([2020](https://github.com/CDTbot/CDTbot)) for DPOAEs. Thresholds can also be manually set. Waveform data, groupings information, and thresholds are all able to be exported into Excel or Matlab files. Publication ready figures are also able to be saved in a variety of picture formats. Finally, `AcousticPlotter` has an extra feature to edit and combine datasets when experiments did not go as planned and multiple tests need to be combined or excluded. 

## Statement of Need

Many auditory research labs use Tucker and Davis Technologies (TDT) equipment to perform ABR and DPOAE testing in humans and animals. ABRs, or auditory brainstem responses, are sound evoked neural responses used to access the limits of hearing in humans and lab animals and appear as a 5-peak waveform when a stimulus is heard. DPOAEs, or distortion product otoacoustic emissions, are responses generated by the outer hair cells of the cochlea (within the inner ear) when stimulated simultaneously by two pure tones. TDT’s auditory stimulation and recording system is an industry leader in collecting these data. However, TDT’s software, BioSigRZ, was not designed for analysis. Analysis using BioSigRZ is clucky, provides no assistance in determining thresholds, and does not provide publication-ready images. Additionally, users who are not completely familiar with the software feel intimidated by BioSigRZ’s complexity. The included Matlab-based application, AcousticPlotter, provides a simplified interface for analyzing (viewing, comparing, and setting thresholds) and organizing BioSigRZ collected data.

Most software for viewing ABRs and DPOAEs data are designed for clinical diagnoses and provide little ability for more detailed analysis as may be required in research. Additionally, most of these software are proprietary and tied to the hardware that originally collected the data and cannot view files generated by BioSigRZ. The software, ABR Peak Analysis by [Eaton-Peabody Laboratory’s engineering core](https://www.masseyeandear.org/research/otolaryngology/eaton-peabody-laboratories/engineering-core), cannot import BioSigRZ files and can only view ABRs, one at a time. AcousticPlotter is designed to import BioSigRZ files, can view both ABR and DPOAE files, reorganize datasets, and compare, and group, multiple subjects making it an ideal tool for quick analysis of ABR and DPOAE data.
    
ABR and DPOAE thresholds are the primary data used for determining the health of a subject’s hearing. For ABRs, however, most thresholds are determined visually as the lowest stimulus level to evoke a waveform with at least 1 peak. ABR threshold is therefore subject to subjectivity 
([Vidler & Parker, 2004](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15515641/)). A number of automated algorithms have been developed to determine ABR threshold 
([Acir et al., 2006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2005.08.004); 
[Berninger et al., 2014](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24557002/); 
[Bogaerts et al., 2009](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19706195/); 
[Cebulla et al., 2000](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10718676/); 
[Davey et al., 2007](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16930965/); 
[Don et al., 1984](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/6523040/); 
[Sanchez et al., 1995](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7490163/); 
[Sininger, 1993](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8444334/); 
[Vannier et al., 2002](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12069764/); 
[Wong & Bickford, 1980](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/6159189/)). 
AcousticPlotter uses a method based on the cross correlation of ABRs to sequential stimulus levels to determine threshold, a method outlined by Suthakar & Liberman ([2019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heares.2019.107782)). Although this method performs well for most ABRs, it is still prone to error due to small or incomplete datasets, high signal-to-noise ratios, and common artifacts. It is therefore important for the user to inspect thresholds and adjust as necessary, which `AcousticPlotter` makes easy to do. DPOAE thresholds are also automatically determine in `AcousticPlotter` and are defined as the lowest stimulation level that produces a distortion product (DP) at least 3x greater than the standard deviation above the mean of the surrounding spectrum ([Bartho et al 2020](https://github.com/CDTbot/CDTbot)). 
    
`AcousticPlotter` makes it easy to group and compare thresholds of different subjects. While this is not a difficult task to perform in software such as Excel, Matlab, Stata, etc., it is an additional step researchers must take to analyze data. Once thresholds are determined, AcousticPlotter provides a feature for displaying threshold vs frequency plots in which subjects can be viewed individually or grouped. Grouped data are displayed as the mean with error bars of either standard deviation or standard error.
	
Finally, `AcousticPlotter` allows users to make corrections to datasets. It is not uncommon for a subject to move or wake up during an experiment, resulting in data that may need to be recollected. The original (bad) data are still stored in the original BioSigRZ generated data set and thus may cause confusion in later data analysis. Using the Combine Files GUI feature allows users to edit, combine, and delete trials to build a robust dataset.
    
In all `AcousticPlotter` is an open-source easy-to-use application for viewing ABR and DPOAE data collected by BioSigRZ, and determining and comparing thresholds between subjects. Documentation and source code is provided on Github, along with example BioSigRZ files. 


## User Notes

Requires Matlab 2021b or higher otherwise some functions may not work

Designed using ARF files created by BioSigRZ Version 5.7.6

Only tested on PC

## Future

Test with older ARF files and makesure `AcosuticPlotter` is backwards compatible

Add ability to find amplitude and latencies of ABR peaks

## Funding

We gratefully acknowledge support from the Project Geneva/ Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences grant HU00011920056, the Remondi Foundation, WayVector, and Bertarelli Foundation endowed professorship (KMS).
